---
layout: post
title: Matrix
categories: Linear-Algebra
tags: [Linear Algebra Coding with Python]
excerpt: Linear Algebra Coding with Python
---

# Creation of matrix 
* The matrix combines several vectors to represent a square structure organized into rows and columns. In the following code, matrix A is the combination of two vectors a and b in the column direction. 
```python

a = np.array([[2],[1],[-1]])
b = np.array([[-3],[4],[1]])
A = np.hstack((a,b))
```
* The **np.hstack(a,b)** is a numpy function used to connect two  objects in the direction of a column. Direct matrix construction without vector joining also uses the **np.array()** function.
```python
B = np.array([[1,2,3], [4,5,6], [7,8,9]])
```

# Object Slicing 
* When you create a  vector or matrix, the index of each element is automatically assigned. The index is a zero-based integer value  for each row and each column. Therefore, each element of the matrix has a row index and a column index. The index is used to access each element  in the object. 
> Matrix[row, column] 
* You can call  multiple elements as  well as single element and create a submatrix of the original matrix. This is called **slicing** of objects. 
> A[:r_1, c_1:c_n]: row 0~r_1, column: c_1 ~ c_(n-1)
> A[:,:] : The colon represents all ranges 
> A[-1, 2] : Negative (-) values in teh  index indicate backwards. For example, -1 means first in the back.

# Arithmetic operations 
* Between the  matrices, the arithmetic operations are done between the same  indices in element  units. Therefore, the dimensions of the operands must  be  same.

# Matrix Product
* Like the dot  product of a vector, you can compute the dot product between two matrices. This operation, the dot product between two  matrices, is called the  **matrix product**.
* The  system of equations can  be  expressed in the form of a matrix system  to which matrix products can be applied.
* The function  **np.equal(a,b)** compares each element of the two vectors and returns "True" if they are equal, "False" otherwise. 

# Special Matrix 
## Transposed matrix
* A matrix in which the rows and columns of mxn-dimensional matrix A are exchanged is called A's transposed matrix. The  dimension of the  transposed matrix is nxm. 
* Transposed matricees can be  created using the  **.T** property of the numpy array object  or the function **transpose()**.
* Transpose of the transpose matrix becomes the  original matrix. 
* In the following  code, the **randint()** function of the numpy.random module is used to create a random matrix object.  
```python
B = np.random.randint(-10, 10, (3,3))
AB = np.dot(A,B)
BtAt = np.dot(B.T, A.T)
print(np.equal(AB.T, BtAt))
# [[True True]
# [True True]
# [True True]]
```

## Square matrix
* A matrix with the same row and column dimensions is called a square matrix, and the transpose of the square matrix is exchanged for the values of the elements other than the diagonal.

## Identity Matrix
* The  identity matrix is a matrix in which the diagonal elements are all 1 and all other elements are 0, and are represented by I_n. 
* The matrix product with  the identity matrix makes that matrix itself. 
* the  **np.eye(n)** function can be used to create an nxn dimension identity matrix.
```python
print(np.eye(3))
#[[1. 0. 0.]
#[0. 1. 0.]
#[0. 0. 1.]]
```

## Trace 
* The sume of the diagonal elements of a square matrix is called the  trace  of the matrix and is represented by  tr(A). It is calculated using the np.trace(A) function.

##  Diagonal matrix
* A matrix with zero elements other than the main diagonal elements of a square matrix is called a diagonal matrix. Of course, a zero matrix with a principal diagonal element of zero  and all elements equal to zero is also a diagonal matrix. The identity matrix is a representative  diagonal matrix. Diagonal matrices can be created using the **np.diag()** function. 

```python
print(np.diag([1,2,3])
#[[1 0 0]
#[0 2 0]
#[0 0 3]]
```

##  Triangular matrix 
* The triangular matrix can be divided into a lower triangular matrix and a upper triangular matrix based on the  diagonal elements of the matrix.
* Lower triangular matrix : A matrix in which all the elements above the principal diagonal elements are zero. **np.tril()**
* Upper triangular matrix:  A matrix in which all the elements below the  main diagonal elements are zero. **np.triu()**
* The transposed matrix of the lower  triangular  matrix becomes the upper triangular matrix and vice  versa. 
* If the diagonal elements of the triangular matrix are all 0, it becomes an irreversible matrix. 
 * AN irreversible matrix is a matrix that does not have  an inverse matrix, and its determinant is 0. 
 
 ## Symmetric matrix
 * It is a square matrix  that  shows a symmetric relationship with respect to the  main diagonal elements.
 * A symmetric matrix can be created as the sum of the  upper or lower triangular matrix and the  transpose matrix of each matrix. 
 * The  symmetric matrix and its transpose matrix are the same. 
 
 # Inverse matrix and determinant
 ## Inverse matrix 
 * A matrix with an  inverse matrix is called an invertible matrix and can be calculated by the  **np.linalg.inv()** function. 
