---
layout: post
title: Classes
categories: Python 
tags: [Python Crash Course]
excerpt: Python Crash course
---

* By convention, capitalized names refer to classes in Python. 
* The ** __init__()** method 
 * A function that's part of a class is a *method*. Everything you learned about functions applies to methods as well. The **__init__()** method is a special method that Python runs auomatically whenever we create a new instance based on the class. This method has two leading underscores and two trailing underscores, a convention that helps prevent Python's default method names from conflicting with your method names. 
  * The *self* parameter  is required in the method definition, and it must come first before the other parameters. It must be  included in the definition because when Python calls this method later, the method call will automatically  pass the  *self* argument. Every method call associated with an instance  automatically passes *self*, which is a reference to the  instance itself. 
 * The two variables defined each have the prefix *self*. Any variable prefixed with *self* is available to every method in the  class, and we'll also be able to access these variables through any instance created from the class.  Variables that are accessible through instances like this are called *attributes*. 
 
 # Inheritance 
 - You don't always have  to start from scratch when writing a class. If the class you're writing is a specialized version of another class you wrote, you can use *inheritance*. When one class *inherits* from another, it takes on the attributes and methods of the  first class. The original class is called the *parent* class, and the new class is the *child* class. The child class can inherit any or all of the  attributes and methods of its parent class, but it's also free to  define new attributes and methods of its own. 
 
 ## The **__init__()** method for a child class
 - The *super()* function is a special function that allows you to call a method from the parent class. This line tells Python to call the **__init__()** method from *Car*, which gives an *ElectricCar* instance all the attributes defined in that method.  

```python
tensorboard  --logdir ~/ch3_tb_log --port 6006
