---
layout: post
title: Automate the Boring Stuff with Python
categories: Python
tags: [Automate the Boring Stuff with Python] 
excerpt: Automate the Boring Stuff with Python
---

# The shutil Module 
* The *shutil* (or shlell utilities) module has functions to let you copy, move, rename and delete files in your Python programs. To use the *shutil* functions, you will first need to *import shutil*.

# Copying Files and Folders
* The *shutil* module provides functions for copying files, as well as entire folders. 
* Calling *shutil.copy(source, destination)* will copy the file at the path *source* to the folder at the path *destination*. 
* Both *source* and *destination* can be strings or *Path* objects.
* If *destination* is a filename, it will be used as the new name of the copied file. This function returns a string or *Path* object of the copied file. 

```python
import shutil, os
from pathlib import Path
p = Path.home()
shutil.copy(p/'spam.txt', p/'some_folder')
shutil.copy(p/'eggs.txt', p/'some_folder/eggs2.txt')
```
* Note that since a folder was specified as the destination, the original *spam.txt* filename is used for the new, copied file's filename.
* While *shutil.copy()* will copy a single file, *shutil.copytree()* will copy an entire folder and every folder and every file contianed in it. Calling *shutil.copytree(source, destination)* will copy the folder at the path *source*, along with all of its files and subfolders, to the folder at the path *destination*. * The *source* and *destination* parameters are both strings. 
* The function returns a string of the path of the copied folder.
```python
import shutil, os
from pathlib import Path
p = Path.home()
shutil.copytree(p/'spam', p/'spam_backup')
```
* The *shutil.copytree()* call creates a new folder named *spam_backup* with the same content as the original *spam* folder. You have now safely backed up.

# Moving and Renaming Files and Folders
* Calling *shutil.move(source, destination)* will move the file or folder at thepath *source* to the path *destination* and will return a string of the absolute path of the new location.
* If *destination* points to a folder, the *source* file gets moved into *destination* and keeps its current filename. 
* The *destination* path can also specify a filename. 
* Finally, the folders that make up the destination must already exist, or else Python will throw an exception.

# Permanently Deleting Files and Folder 
* You can delete a single file or a single empty folder with functions in the *os* module, whereas to delete a folder and all of its contents, you use the *shutil* module.
* Calling *os.unlink(path)* will delete the file at *path*.
* Calling *os.rmdir(path)* will delete the folder at *path*. This folder must be empty of any files or folders.
* Calling *shutil.rmtree(path)* will remove the folder at *path*, and all files and folders it contains will also be deleted.

* Be careful when using these functions in your programs. It's often a good idea to first run your program with these calls commented out and with *print()* calls added to show the files that would be deleted.

# Safe Deletes with the send2trash Module
* Since Python's built-in *shutil.rmtree()* function irreversibly deletes files and folders, it can be dangerous to use. A much better way to delete files and folders is with the third-party *send2trash* module. 
* You can install this module by running *pip install --user send2trash* from a Terminal window.
* Using *send2trash* is much safer than Python's regular delete functions, because it will send folders and files to your computer's trash or recycle bin instead of permanently deleting them. 
* If a bug in your program deletes something with *send2trash* you didn't intend to delete, you can later restore it from the recycle bin.
```python
import send2trash
baconFile = open('bacon.txt', 'a')
baconFile.write('Bacon is not a vegetable')
baconFile.close()
send2trash.send2trash('bacon.txt')
```
* In general, you should always use the *send2trash.send2trash()* function to delete files and folders.
* But while sending files to the recycle in lets you recover them later, it will not free up disk space like permanently deleting them does.
* If you want your program to free up disk sapce, use the *os* and *shutil* functions for deleting files and folders.
* Note that the *send2trash* function can only send files to the recycle bin;it cannot pull files out of it.

# Walking a Directory Tree
* Say you want to rename every file in some folder and also every file in every subfolder of that folder. That is, you want to walk through the directory tree, touching each file as you go.Writing a program to do this could get tricky; fortunately, Python provides a function to handle this process for you.
* Here is an example program that usese the *os.walk()* function on the directory tree.
```python
import os

for folderName, subfolders, filenames in os.walk('C:\\delicious'):
 print('The current folder is '+folderName)

 for subfolder in subfolders:
  print('SUBFOLDER OF '+ folderName + ': '+subfolder)

 for filename in filenames:
  print('FILE INSIDE '+ folderName + ': '+ filename)

 print('')

```
* The *os.walk()* function is passed a single string value: the path of a folder. 
* You can use *os.walk()* in a for loop statement to walk a directory tree, much like how you can use the *range()* function to walk over a range of numbers.
* Unlike *range()*, the *os.walk()* function will return three values on each iteration through the loop:
 * A string of the current folder's name
 * A list of strings of the folders in the current folder
 * A list of strings of the files in the current folder

* Since *os.walk()* returns lists of strings for the *subfolder* and *filename* variables, you can use these liskts in their own for loops. 

# Compress Files with the zipfile Module
* You may be familiar with ZIP files, which can hold the compressed contents of many other files. 
* Compressing a file reduces its size, which is useful when transferring it over the internet.
* And since a ZIP file can also contain multiple files and subfolders, it's a handy way to package several files into one. 
* This single file, called an *archive file* can then be, say, attached to an email.
* Your Python programs can create and open ZIP files using functions in the *zipfile* module. 

# Reading ZIP Files
* To read the contents of a ZIP file, you must create a *ZipFile* object. *ZipFile* objects are conceptually similar to the *File* objects you saw returned by the *open()* function in the previous chapter:
* They are values through which the program interacts with the file.
* To create a *ZipFile* object, call the *zipfile.ZipFile()* function, passing it a string of the *.ZIP* file's filename.
* Note that *zipfile* is the name of the Python's module, and *ZipFile()* is the name of the function.
```python
import zipfile, os
from pathlib import Path

p = Path.home()
exampleZip = zipfile.ZipFile(p/'example.zip')
exampleZip.namelist()
samInfo = exampleZip.getinfo('spam.txt')
spamInfo.file_size
spamInfo.compress_size
exampleZip.close()
```
* A *ZipFile* object has a *namelist()* method that returns a list of strings for all the files and folders contained in the ZIp file.
* These strings can be passed to the *getinfo()* ZipFile method to return a *ZipInfo* object about that particular file.
* *ZipInfo* objects have their own attributes, such as *file_size* and *compress_size* in bytes, which hold integers of the original file size and compressed file size, respectively.
* While a *ZipFile* object represents an entire archive file, a *ZipInfo* object holds useful information about a single file in the archive.

# Extracting from ZIP files
* The *extractall()* method for *ZipFile* objects extracts all the fiels and folders from a ZIP file into the current working directory.
```python
imort zipfile, os
from pathlib import Path
p = Path.home()
exampleZip = zipfile.ZipFile(p/'example.zip')
exampleZip.extractall()
exampleZip.close()
```
* Optionally, you can pass a folder name to *extractall()* to have it extracted the files into a folder other than the current working directory.
* If the folder passed to the *extractall()* method does not exist, it will be created. 

