---
layout: post
title: YOLO, YOLOv2, YOLOv3: All You Need to Know
categories: Object-Detection
tags: [deeplearning]
---

## YOLOv1
YOLO divides the input image into *SxS* grid. For example, the image below is divided to 5x5 grid (YOLO actually chose *S=7*). If the center of an object falls into a grid cell, that grid cell is responsible for detecting that object (we assign the object to the grid cell where the center of the object exists). 

YOLO runs a classification and localization problem to each of the *7x7=49* grid cells simultaneously. Since the classification and localization network can detect only one object, that means any grid cell can detect only one object. Because of this grid idea, YOLO faces some problems:

1. Since we use *7x7* grid, any grid can detect only one object, the maximum number of objects the model can detect is 49.

2. If a grid cell contains more than one object, the model will not be able to detect all of them; this is the problem of close object detection that YOLO suffers from.

3. The object may be located in more than one grid, so the model may detect the taxi more than one time (in more than one grid), and this problem is solved using non-max suppression, which we will talk about later.

All of the 49 cells are detected simultaneously, and that is why YOLO is considered a very fast model. 

Each of the *7x7* grid cell predicts *B* bounding boxes (YOLO chose *B=2*), and for each box, the model outputs a confidence score *c*. These confidence scores reflect how confident the model is of containing an object. Using this score, we can prevent the model from detecting backgrounds, so if no object exists in the cell, the confidence scores should be zero. Otherwise, we want the confidence score to equal to the Intersection over Union (IoU) between the predicted box and the ground truth. 

Although we have 49 grid cells, and for each cell we predict 2 boxes (98 boxes in total); however, the vast majority of these boxes will have very low confidence, so we can get rid of them.

Additionally to the confidence score *C* the model outputs 4 numbers *(x,y), w, h* to represent the location and the dimensions of the predicted bounding box.

The *(x,y)* coordinates represent the center of the box relative to the bounds of the grid cell. The width and height are predicted relative to the whole image, so *0< (x,y,w,h) < 1*.

YOLO was trained to detect 20 different classes of objects. For any grid cell, the model will output 20 conditional class probabilities, one for each class. 

While each grid cell gives us a choice between two bounding boxes, we only have one class probability vector. We will get rid of boxes with low confidence. 

### Output Shape 

The predictions are encoded as $S \times S \times (B \times 5 + Classes)$ tensor.

### Network Design
YOLO uses a single convolutional network to simultaneously predict multiple bounding boxes and class probabilities for those boxes. This network is inspired by the LeNet model for image classification, but instead of the inception modules used by LeNet, YOLO simply uses *1x1* reduction layers followed by *3x3* convolutional layers. It has 24 convolutional layers followed by 2 fully connected layers. As we mentioned above, the final output of the network is *7x7x30* tensor of predictions. 

### Loss Function
YOLO uses sum-squared error SSE for the loss function because it is easy to optimize. We need to consider 3 points when we go through the loss function.

1. The loss function penalizes classification error only if there is an object inside that grid cell.
2. Since we have *B=2* bounding boxes for each cell we need to choose one of them for the loss and this will be the box that has the highest IoU with the ground truth box so the loss will penalize localization loss if that box is responsible for the ground truth box.
3. SSE weights localization error equally with classification error which may not be ideal.


#### Localization Loss
This is the SSE between the predicted box coordiantes *(x,y)* and the ground truth coordinates $(\hat{x}, \hat{y})$. We sum over all the 49 grid cells in the image and for each cell, we sum over all the *B* boxes. To comply with points one and two above, YOLO uses a binary variable $\mathbb{1}$ so that ${obj}_{ij}$ is one if object appears in cell $i$ box $j$ for this cell is responsible for that object, otherwise 0. 



