---
layout: post
title:  "Kalman Filters Everywhere"
author: seri
categories: [ computer vision ]
image: assets/images/depth/12.png
tags: featured 
---
<h2> Introduction </h2>
Most modern systems are equipped with numerous sensors that provide estimation of hidden (unknown) variables based on a series of measurements. One of the biggest challenges of tracking and control systems is providing accurate and precise estimation of the hidden variables in the presence of uncertainty. 

The Kalman Filter is one of the most important and common estimation algorithms. The Kalman Filter produces estimates of hidden variables based on inaccurate and uncertain measurements. Also, the Kalman Filter provides a prediction of the future system state based on past estimations. 

<h2> The Big Picture </h2>
Let's look at the Kalman Filter as a black box. The Kalman Filter has inputs and outputs. The inputs are noisy and sometimes inaccurate measurements. The outputs are less noisy and sometimes more accurate estimates. The estimates can be system state parameters that were not measured or observed. This last sentence describes the superpower of the Kalman Filter. It can estimate system parameters that are not observed or measured.

In short, you can think of the Kalman Filter as an algorithm that can estimate observable and unobservable parameters with great accuracy in real-time. Estimates with high accuracy are used to make precise predictions and decisions. For these reasons, Kalman Filters are used in robotics and real-time systems that need reliable information. 

<h2> Kalman Filter Usage </h2>
Kalman Filtering is used to do the following:
<ul><li> In object tracking, Kalman Filter use the measured position of an object to more accurately estimate the position and velocity of that object.</li>
<li> In guidance, navigation, and control, Kalman Filter use Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors to estimate an objects location, velocity, and acceleration; and use those estimates to control the object's next moves. </li></ul>

The real power of the Kalman Filter is not smoothing the measurements. It is the ability to estimate system parameters that can not be measured or observed with accuracy. Estimates with improved accuracy in systems that operate in real-time, allow systems greater control and thus more capabilities. 







<h2> References </h2>
<ul> 
<li><a href="https://thekalmanfilter.com/kalman-filter-explained-simply"> thekalmanfilter.com </a><li>
<li><a href="https://www.bzarg.com/p/how-a-kalman-filter-works-in-pictures"> bzarg.com </a><li>
</ul>



